Please use a phone running API 23. It runs fine on API 26 other than a small issue with notification channels which prevents the user from receiving invites.

This project is a battleship game with the backend entirely built on Firebase. Upon downloading the app, the user will be prompted to either login or create a new account, with this functionality implemented using Firebase’s authentication system. The user will then be greeted in the main page of the app, where there are several different options to start a game.

The first method is the user can create a game himself and wait for someone else to join. Or, the user can invite another user in the system by email. Doing so will cause a notification to be triggered on the other user’s phone if they have the app open. This notification will appear in the notification bar, and by clicking it the user can quickly join the other person’s game. The final option for joining a game is by looking through the list of available games. This is a separate activity found in the activity bar which generates a list of all the games in the database, using firebase’s UI list adapter. A blue marker on the side indicates games that have not already been joined by other people or were not created by this user (they can’t join their own game). By clicking this button, the user can join a game.

Finally, we get to the actual gameplay. The game is a simplified version of the actual game of battleship, with each user having five single space ships which are randomly placed on the board by shuffling an array. The game state is represented by five separate objects. The first is a boolean indicating whose turn it is. The next two objects are lists of integers containing which spaces on each player’s board are occupied by ships. The final two objects are two lists of integers of the same size indicating which spaces on the board have been clicked. When the user enters the GameActivity, a reference to this location in the database is stored on their phone and is constantly listened to for updates. It was difficult to make sure that both the user and the other player’s clicks on the board were updated in real time. The game ends when all five ships have been found, with a toast message displayed and the option to return to the home page.

In addition, various error handling was required to ensure smooth gameplay. If a user exits the game after joining, the game object is deleted and both players are returned to the lobby (unless they quit out of the app entirely). I also had to make sure both player’s games started and ended at the same time to avoid conflicts updating data. This was accomplished by using lots of local booleans on each player’s system. If I had more time, I would have liked to implement an activity to allow players to place their own ships, rather than generating them randomly, but as a team of one this was a necessary compromise.
